



Network Working Group                                        J.-P. Fiset
Internet-Draft                                                  Crypto4A
Intended status: Standards Track                            M. Ounsworth
Expires: 6 February 2026                                         Entrust
                                                           H. Tschofenig
                                                                   H-BRS
                                                              M. Wiseman
                                                           5 August 2025


    Extended Key Usage (EKU) for X.509 Certificates associated with
                            Attestation Keys
             draft-jpfiset-lamps-attestationkey-eku-latest

Abstract

   As described in RFC5280, key usages are specified in X.509
   certificates using the certificate extensions "Key Usage" and
   "Extended Key Usage".  This document defines an Extended Key Usage
   (EKU) relating to keys that are dedicated to the purpose of signing
   attestation evidence as introduced in RFC9334.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 6 February 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Extended Key Usage for Attestation Key
     3.1.  Including the EKU for Attestation Key in Certificates
     3.2.  Implication for a Certificate Authority
     3.3.  Implication for the RATS Verifier
     3.4.  Implication for Cryptographic Modules
   4.  Conventions and Definitions
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  Normative References
   Appendix A.  ASN.1 Module
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Attesters, as defined in Remote Attestation Procedures (RATS) in
   [RFC9334], can use cryptographic private keys to identify the origin
   of the evidence and protect its integrity.  Those private keys are
   referred to as Attestation Keys.

   Attestation Keys can be endorsed by a Certification Authority (CA) by
   issuing X.509 certificates (see [RFC5280]).  Those certificates
   SHOULD include an extended key usage to indicate that the associated
   key is dedicated to the purpose of attesting evidence.  This allows
   recipients of signed evidence to trust that the associated key is
   controlled according to the constraints specified in this document.

2.  Terminology

   Much of the terms used in this specification are borrowed from RATS
   ([RFC9334]).  Readers of this specification should review the RATS
   architecture and its terminology to put in context the text presented
   in this specification.

   Attestation Key : A key under the control of the Attester and
   reserved for the purpose of signing collected claims.

3.  Extended Key Usage for Attestation Key

   This specification defines the KeyPurposeId id-kp-attestationKey.
   This KeyPurposeId is reserved for Attestation Keys.

   The term "signing attestation evidence" refers to performing a
   digital signature using an Attestation Key over content that includes
   claims about the target environment (see [RFC9334]).

   An Attestation Key must be associated with the "digital signing" key
   usage, as any other keys used to performed digital signature.
   Furthermore, an Attestation Key MUST adhere to the following
   constraints:

   *  An Attestation Key SHOULD be used only by an Attester to digitally
      sign claims that the Attester can observe in the target
      environment.  The Attester SHOULD NOT use the Attestation Key for
      any other purpose (dedication).

   *  An Attestation Key MUST NOT be controlled by any entity other than
      the associated Attester.  This constraint is to ensure that other
      entity can not impersonate the Attester (non-repudiation).

3.1.  Including the EKU for Attestation Key in Certificates

   When the EKU id-kp-attestationKey is included in a X.509, other
   considerations should be taken:

   *  The X.509 extension "key usage" MUST be set to "digital
      signature".  In other words, the value of the associated field
      includes the bit "digitalSignature" set.

   *  The X.509 extension "extended key usage" SHOULD NOT include usage
      other than the one defined in this document (id-kp-
      attestationKey).

3.2.  Implication for a Certificate Authority

   When a Certificate Authority issues a X.509 certificate that includes
   the extended key usage defined in this document, certain additional
   considerations MUST be taken to ensure that the constraints defined
   in this document are respected.

   Issuing a X.509 certificate with the extended key usage id-kp-
   attestationKey equates to providing an endorsement of the attester as
   defined in the RATS architecture.  Therefore, the procedures and
   practices employed by a Certificate Authority MUST be augmented to
   take into account the security considerations relating to the
   Attestation Key as outlined in the RATS architecture.

   In particular, it is not sufficient for a CA to verify that the
   subject of the certificate, the Attester, has possession of the
   subject key.  It MUST also ensure that the Attester is the only
   entity that controls the key.  This can be accomplished (but not
   restricted to) by using a key confined to specialized hardware under
   the control of the Attester.

3.3.  Implication for the RATS Verifier

   In [RFC9334], the Verifier is the role that consumes the evidence
   produced by an Attester.  As part of the verification process, the
   Verifier assesses endorsements, among other things.  A X.509
   certificate containing the EKU id-kp-attestationKey is an endorsement
   of the Attester by the issuing authorities.

   While assessing an endorsement provided this way, a Verifier must
   follow all practices to validate the veracity of the certificate.

3.4.  Implication for Cryptographic Modules

   Attestation Keys are instantiated and operated on by cryptographic
   modules.  These modules MUST provide the services required to
   restrict the use of an Attestation Key to its associated Attester.

   The mechanisms used to perform those restrictions are out of scope
   for this document.

4.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

5.  Security Considerations

   For attestation evidence to be valuable, coordination between the
   various roles is required:

   *  The cryptographic module MUST restrict the use of the Attestation
      Key to the associated Attester.

   *  The CA MUST ensure that the Attester is the only entity that
      controls the Attestation Key which is subject to the issuance of a
      certificate.

   *  A Verifier must perform the assessment of the presented evidence
      using all the procedures required to ascertain as to the origin
      and validity of the attester.

   The risks associated with a failure of this coordination reduces the
   quality of the trustworthiness of the evidence.

   The implications are outlines in the Security Considerations section
   in RATS ([RFC9334]).

6.  IANA Considerations

   IANA needs to assign an object identifier (OID) for this purpose.

7.  Normative References

   [RFC9334]  Birkholz, H., Thaler, D., Richardson, M., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS)
              Architecture", RFC 9334, DOI 10.17487/RFC9334, January
              2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9334>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5280>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

Appendix A.  ASN.1 Module

   The following ASN.1 module provides the complete definition of the
   Attestation Key KeyPurposeId.

     DEFINITIONS EXPLICIT TAGS ::=

     BEGIN

     -- EXPORTS ALL --

     -- IMPORTS NOTHING --

     -- OID Arc --

     id-kp  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::= {
       iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
       security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) kp(3) }

     -- Attestation Key Extended Key Usage --

     id-kp-attestationKey OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-kp XX }

     END

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Jean-Pierre Fiset
   Crypto4A Inc.
   1550A Laperriere Ave
   Ottawa, Ontario  K1Z 7T2
   Canada
   Email: jp@crypto4a.com


   Mike Ounsworth
   Entrust Limited
   2500 Solandt Road - Suite 100
   Ottawa, Ontario  K2K 3G5
   Canada
   Email: mike.ounsworth@entrust.com


   Hannes Tschofenig
   University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhein-Sieg
   Germany
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net


   Monty Wiseman
   United States of America
   Email: montywiseman32@gmail.com
